NFTopology controller doc (#428)
nephio-project/nephio: operators/nftopology/README.md

# NFTopology Controller
- Author: @s3wong
- Status: Work-in-Progress
- Approver: 

## Description

> NFTopology controller (NTC) takes a network topology centric input and kickstarts the Nephio automation process via generating a PackageVariantSet (PVS) custom resource, and as the associated packages are being deployed, NTC continuously updates statuses to reflect state of deployment of these packages. Primarily, NTC serves as example application to utilize Nephio primitives for network function automations.

Reviewer: The NFTopology controller (NTC) takes a network topology centric input and kickstarts the Nephio automation process by generating a PackageVariantSet (PVS) custom resource. As the associated packages are being deployed, NTC continuously updates their status fields to reflect the state of deployment of these packages. Primarily, NTC serves as example application that utilizes Nephio primitives for network function automations.

Author: Changed made. Thanks

![NFTopology High Level Functional Diagram](./img/nftopology-functional.jpg)

> NTC contains two controllers, one watches the NFTopology custom resource, and reconcile that intent via constructing a number of PVSs; the other controller watches PackageRevision resources in the management cluster to determine what NF package has been deployed, and updates the NFTopology status accordingly.

Reviewer: NTC contains two controllers. The first watches the NFTopology custom resource and reconcile that intent by constructing a number of PVSs. The other controller watches PackageRevision resources in the management cluster to determine what NF packages have been deployed and updates the NFTopology status accordingly.

Author: Comments incorporated. Thanks

## NFTopology CRD
This is the definition of the NFTopology custom resource:

```go
// NFInterface defines the specification of network attachment points of a NF
type NFInterface struct {
    // Name of the network attachment point
    Name string `json:"name" yaml:"name"`

    // NetworkInstanceRef is a reference to NetworkInstance. Two NF with attachment to
    // the same NetworkInstance is considered connected neighbors
    NetworkInstanceName string `json:"networkInstanceName" yaml:"networkInstanceName"`
}

// PackageRevisionReference is a temporary replica of PackageRevisionReference used for the

> // ONE Summit

Reviewer: Perhaps we want to remove this reference to the ONE summit?

Author: Removed. Thanks

    // Detail on the deployed instances.
    NFInstances []NFDeployedInstance `json:"nfInstances,omitempty" yaml:"nfInstances,omitempty"`
}
```
where NFDeployedInstance is defined as:

```go
type NFConnectivity struct {
    // peer NF's Id (see NFInstance struct below)
    NeighborName string `json:"neighborName,omitempty" yaml:"neighborName,omitempty"`
}

// NFDeployedInstance defines an NF instance that is deployed
type NFDeployedInstance struct {
    // unique ID for this NF instance
    ID string `json:"id,omitempty" yaml:"id,omitempty"`
    // name of workload cluster where the NF instance is to be deployed
    ClusterName string `json:"clusterName,omitempty" yaml:"clusterName,omitempty"`
    // type of NF, example: amf, smf, upf
    NFType string `json:"nfType,omitempty" yaml:"nfType,omitempty"`
    // list of connected NF instances to this NF instance
    Connectivities []NFConnectivity `json:"connectivities,omitempty" yaml:"connectivities,omitempty"`
}
```

The concept behind the NFTopology custom resource is denoted by the following diagram:

![NFTopology CRD](./img/nftopology-crd.jpg)

> Note that the NetworkInstance field is static, i.e., user defined a fixed NetworkInstance resource to be linked to a template, whereas the actual NF instance is dynamic --- that is, the actuation of the instance of the NF is based off of a cluster matching some labels, but the NetworkInstace this NF specification will be attaching to is statically configured. Note that each NFInstance would only create one instance per each cluster matching a label, and that the NFNetworkInstance does **NOT** define the network, it is merely

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the NetworkInstance field is static, i.e., the user defines a fixed NetworkInstance resource to be linked to a template, whereas the actual NF instance is dynamic --- that is, the actuation of the instance of the NF is based on a cluster matching some labels, but the NetworkInstance that this NF specification will be attaching to is statically configured. Note that each NFInstance would only create one instance per each cluster matching a label, and that the NFNetworkInstance does **NOT** define the network, it is merely

Author: Comments incorporated. Thanks

> a placeholder to denote a connectivity between an instance's attachment point to another instance's attachment point

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a placeholder to denote connectivity between an instance's attachment point and another instance's attachment point
```

Author: Comments incorporated. Thanks

## NFTopology to PackageVariantSet CR Mapping

> NTC kickstarts the hydration process via applying the **PackageVariantSet** (PVS) CR to management cluster. The following table denotes which fields from NFTopology (and its associated struct) will be used to populate the PVS CR:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NTC kickstarts the hydration process by applying the **PackageVariantSet** (PVS) CR to management cluster. The following table denotes which fields from NFTopology (and its associated struct) will be used to populate the PVS CR:
```

Author: Comments incorporated. Thanks

| NFTopology or associated | PVS Spec field | 
|:------------------------ | :------------- |
| NFTopology.NFInstance.NFTemplate.PackageRevisionRef | Upstream (*Tag* is missing from PackageRevisionRef... Revision?) | 
| NFTopology.NFInstance.ClusterSelector | Targets[0].Repositories |
| {nf-deployment-name : *name of NFTopology CR* | Labels[] | 

The assumption here is that (at least a subset of) the ClusterSelector labels will be used to also label the repositories, i.e., target workload cluster with label `region == x; cluster-role == y` will also be part of the labels to use on a deployment repo of a target workload cluster.

NFTopology CR has capacity input which needs to be passed through PVS to the actual NF packages. This can be accomplished via the kpt provided function **search-replace** where the capacity input from NFTopology CR can be passed to the cloned NF package, which also contains capacity.yaml.

> NTC will also need to associate all the to-be-fan'ed-out packages with this deployment. In PVS, this is allowed as a set of labels to be passed to PVS controller, which will then propagate those labels to PackageVariant (PV) CRs, and subsequently the PackageRevision (PR) CRs. NTC will then watch for all the PR resources created, and associated them with which NFTopology specification via these labels.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NTC will also need to associate all the to-be-fan'ed-out packages with this deployment. In PVS, this is allowed as a set of labels to be passed to PVS controller, which will then propagate those labels to PackageVariant (PV) CRs, and subsequently the PackageRevision (PR) CRs. NTC will then watch for all the PR resources created, and associate them with the relevant NFTopology specification via these labels.
```

Author: Comments incorporated. Thanks

NTC also adds a label to each of the associated PVCs for connectivity association. This will lead to each resulting PackageRevision to also carry these labels.

## Tracking Packages
NTC will embed a label 'nf-deployment-name', which is set to NFToplogy CR's own name; PackageVariantSet and PackageVariant controllers will propagate this label to all the PackageRevision resources associated with the "fan-out"ed packages.

> NTC watches over all PackageRevision resources in the management cluster, and maps the NFTopology intent to the number of deployed NF resources via tracking corresponding PackageRevision resources. As each PackageRevision resource gets to *PUBLISHED* state, NTC would update the **NFInstances** field of its status to reflect on deployed NF package.

Author: Comments incorporated. Thanks

> NTC will also extract the number of pending conditions from each of the PR as a display to user(s) who want to continuously examine the lifecycle of the packages, and which conditions are gating a particular package from being deployed. NTC essentially tracks status of package deployment for all NF instances specified derived from the NFTopology intent; however, NTC does **NOT** track the progress of the deployment once the package is pushed to the workload cluster.

Reviewer: This is nice!

## Constructing NFInstances of NFTopology Status
NTC only tracks those NF instances that are successfully deployed, i.e., the corresponding cloned and hydrated / specialized package is merged to the **main** branch on the corresponding deployment repo for that target workload cluster. NTC would first create the initial *NFDeployTopology* CR when the first package merged, then update the CR as every subsequent package got merged.

> As each NF package got merged, the existing NFDeployedInstance's Connectivities field would change. This relationship is keyed off of the NetworkInstance resource; NetworkInstance specifies for each cluster matching the input label, a corresponding NF specified by NFTemplate would be deployed. For each NFAttachment defined on this NFInstance, there is a NetworkInstance defined --- and for any other NFInstance that has NFAttachment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As each NF package gets merged, the existing NFDeployedInstance's Connectivities field will change. This relationship is keyed off of the NetworkInstance resource; NetworkInstance specifies for each cluster matching the input label, a corresponding NF specified by NFTemplate will be deployed. For each NFAttachment defined on this NFInstance, there is a NetworkInstance defined --- and for any other NFInstance that has NFAttachment
```

Reviewer: Thanks for the document @s3wong , it explains the NTC very well.

Author: Thanks for the thorough review!
